# Dollar Auctions

In English soccer, the 20 best teams play in the top league (called the Premier League) each season. At the end of the season, the three teams that finish in the last three places (20th, 19th, 18th) are sent (relegated) to the second division (called the Championship). The Championship season is ending at the same time and the top three teams (1st, 2nd, 3rd) are promoted to the first division, ensuring 20 teams remain in the Premier League for the next season. (This is a slight simplification, in reality the top two teams are promoted directly and the next four teams compete in a tournament for the 3rd promotion spot.)

Each lower division is setup the same way, with the top teams moving up a division and the bottom teams moving down a division. Most European leagues follow the same model, called promotion/relegation, while leagues like the MLS in the United States do not (making them more like the other major American sports).  

Money is an important component of success in competitive sports. It can be described as necessary but not sufficient which means spending a lot does not guarantee success, but succeeding without investment roughly proportional to your competitors almost always fails. It is possible to be a top Premier League team and spend less than the top spending teams, but the team will still be spending consistently with mid-level Premier League teams, and much more than a Championship team. 

This leads to some fun stories, where ambitious investors might purchase a bargain bin team in the fourth or fifth division, invest heavily, and try to promote them to the top division over the course of a several seasons. Red Bull (Energy Drink) successfully promoted RB Leipzig from the fifth division to the first division in seven seasons. In the top division since 2016, RB Leipzig have finished top 4 in all but one season. Hollywood actors Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElhenney are attempting to replicate this success with Wrexham, a 5th division team at purchase time and now competing in the 3rd division in England. They hope to enter the Premier League within 10 years of purchase.

Aside from the prestige of owning a top division team, what is the point of promotion from an investment perspective? The answer is that teams in the top divisions tend to make more revenue than lower division. Some of this is a direct guarantee: for example, broadcast rights for the league are split among the teams and, as you can imagine, TV stations/streamers play more for Premier League rights than the Championship. Additionally, there are indirect benefits of greater interest in the team, greater sales even if it is for non-fans to have the chance to see Pep Guardiola's team in person when they come to the local stadium.

Now let's get to the dollar auction. Sticking with the simplified version of promotion where the top three teams are promoted, imagine you own the team currently in 4th place. You could invest more in the team (players, staff, facilities) and if your investment can edge you into 3rd place, then you get promoted and the investment might actually pay for itself with the extra Premier League (EPL) revenue. Unfortunately the team in 3rd place is thinking the same thing. They cannot afford to lose the future EPL revenue they are expecting by maintaining 3rd place, and they will match you dollar for dollar to secure it. 

Once both teams have spent the full amount of the future EPL revenue they expect, you think the game would stop. But this is where the dollar auction math kicks in. For the team in 4th, they have already spent all the money and will not recuperate any of it if they aren't promoted. They stand to lose it all (sunk cost). Alternatively, they could keep spending and try for 3rd, then they will still lose money on balance, but it will be offset by the future EPL revenue.  The 3rd place team applies the same logic and the investing continues. Eventually, both teams either run out of time (the season ends), money, or reasonably priced options for spending more. Or, more likely, run against regulations from the league for spending too much money. See, the league recognizes the perverse incentives at play and puts in guardrails (financial fair play) however these work well for repeat offenders, and less well for a once-a-decade financial push from lower division team with big dreams.

In the 2022-23 season, the top three teams (each promoted) were Burnley, Sheffield United and Luton Town. Burnley ran a £28M deficit while Sheffield's £31M deficit was a club record and Sheffield was punished for defaulting on payments. 
