# Primer: 2008 Financial Crisis

Bitcoin's genesis block contains the quote from the Times of London, "Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks." This headline is a reference to actions being considered in the UK in response to the 2008 financial (or housing) crisis. Many times in discussions on bitcoin and blockchain, this crisis is brought up by a speaker. Knowing a bit about the crisis can give you a quick litmus test for how much expertise a speaker has and even what their political disposition is, just by listening to how they characterize (or fail to characterize) the crisis.

While the crisis manifested itself in the housing market, the story beings with wall street. Wall street is where individuals or institutions take unencumbered money and try to increase it. A variety of investment opportunities exist and one simple characterization of them is to place them along a line from safe (low risk, low reward) to risky (high risk, high reward). An example of a safe investment would be a government bond where the investor lends money to the US government and receives it back with a low amount of interest. It is very safe because large governments like the US do not fail to pay back these loans. An example of a risky investment would be in a hedge fund, where an investor will manage your money for you and try to earn you a large return. However there is a real risk you end up losing some (or all) of your money. Most governments require registration before you can play in these high risk markets.

Another type of investment that was historically made by banks (as opposed to wall street) is the mortgage. Here the bank lends a person money to purchase a house, and the person repays the loan with interest. How safe is this investment by the bank? It is certainly less safe than a government bond because people might not pay back the mortgage, while the government has always paid back. Banks try to minimize this risk by evaluating people before offering them a mortgage (using what are called lending standards, which might include what kind of job the individual has and how much money they have). On the other hand, giving someone a mortgage is less risky than giving someone a credit card. There are two reasons. One reason is that people tend to prioritize their mortgage payments, over other debt repayments, because failing to do so might result in them losing their house and having to move. The second reason is that if the debt repayments stop, the bank still has the house, which it can sell to pay down the debt ("foreclosing"). Banks might not get full asking price for the house, so there could be losses with foreclosing, but the losses are minimized. In other words, the house serves as collateral for the mortgage loan.

Wall street investors are too busy to find people who want mortgages, assess them, and remind them for missed payments. And so an arrangement between banks (who became less regulated in the late 1990s) and wall street took place where retail banks would initiate the mortgages, bundle hundreds of them together, and sell them to an investment bank (which could now legally be the same bank, just in a different department) who would sell them to wall street investors. Because investors generally could not afford to invest in hundreds of mortgages, the bundle is split up into shares (called a mortgage backed security), and investors can buy as many shares as they want.

Wall street investors include wealthy individuals who can invest in whatever they want. But some of the biggest players on wall street are institutions that  are investing, for example, all the money collected from workers within a certain organization for the workers' retirement payments. If these institutions engaged in high risk investing and lost, the losses would impact the retirement pensions of thousands of workers, which would have a large social cost in addition to the actual lost money. As a result, governments police these investors and mandate that all investments must be safe.

Who is to say if a given investment is safe or not? There are private companies, called rating agencies, that do exactly this. Before the investment bank sells its mortgage backed security on wall street, it first asks an agency to assign it a rating for how safe it is. For investments based on loans, safety is influenced by two main things: the chances it will repaid (the opposite is called "delinquency" or a "default") and how much money can be recovered if the loan defaults (the opposite is called the "expected losses" or less formally, a "haircut").  Safety ratings have letter-based grades and vary a bit between agencies. A security with a default rate less than 0.1% might be AAA which is the safest grade, while a security with a default rate of 80% might be CCC which is risky (but there is still a 20% chance it will be repaid which is why people might bet on them if it does not cost a lot to place the bet). Banks that sell securities want the safest rating (AAA) as it allows them sell to pension funds and other government-restricted investors. Banks may try to shop between rating agencies seeking a high rating. Conversely, governments may require that safe investments are rated as such by two or more rating agencies. 

How safe is a mortgage backed security? Historically default rates on mortgages are in the ballpark of 2%. Even with the house acting as collateral, this is too high to be AAA. So investment banks had a clever idea for creating mortgage backed securities: when mortgage payments are paid once a month, instead of splitting the payment equally amongst the shareholders, they would create priority groups. Consider using four groups. Holders with the first kind of share would get paid first. Only once all these shareholders were fully paid for the month, the payments would flow to the second group. The fourth group would be paid last. If defaults happen, the fourth group would lose out first. The third group would not lose anything until the fourth group had lost their entire payment for that month. It would take a catastrophe for the first group to start losing money.

Banks took these securities to the rating agencies and asked for separate ratings on each priority group. They might receive something like: AAA on the first group (senior shares), AA on the second group (junior share), and BBB on the third (mezzanine shares). They did not bother getting a rating on the fourth group (equity shares). Now they could sell the senior (and maybe junior) shares to pension plans and others wanting safe investments, while mezzanine shares were still marketable to hedge funds and risk-tolerant investors. 

What about the equity shares? Who would want them? If interest payments trickle, banks do not have to give the same rate to each kind of share. They can setup the security to give lower rates to senior (since they are less risky) and higher rates to equity (to compensate for the risk). They will also offer equity shares for a lot less money than a senior share. Even still, banks had a hard time selling equity shares. Then they came up with another clever idea (or more precisely, a new application of the same clever idea they already had). An investment bank would buy up a large number of equity shares from different securities and pool them together. They would then repeat the same trick of splitting the repayments to the pool of equity shares into priority groups. So you might have a senior share of a pool of equity shares of some security. This is safer than just having the equity shares of the security and so banks might be able to squeeze some moderate ratings out of a pile of unrated equity shares. Of course, an artefact of this method is that you also create equity shares of equity shares which are so risky, investors took to calling them "toxic waste."

Now the stage is set for the actual crisis. The demand for AAA mortgage products was unquenchable. Investment banks soon ran out of mortgages to buy off of retail banks, and retail banks ran out of people to give mortgages to. Yet the demand was still there. So retail banks had to find new ways to create new mortgages. This could be giving larger mortgages to their existing customers, encouraging them to buy a bigger house or a second property as an investment (perhaps renovating it and flipping it). It could also mean giving mortgages to people who normally would not qualify with their income level (the subprime mortgage market).

At first everyone is happy. Investors are getting new mortgage products to buy. Investment banks are making money on the mortgage products they are selling. Commercial banks are making money selling to investment banks. Governments are happy that low income individuals can get mortgages and buy houses for the first time. Easy-to-obtain mortgages leads to more demand for houses which increases housing prices and creates jobs in construction. Home owners are happy that the value of their homes are going up. Buyers are not happy with increasing prices but are able to cope through larger mortgages, and expect to benefit down-the-line after they buy their first home. Even if there is a foreclosure, it might be profitable if a house's value has increased materially from it was purchased.

The issue is that again, there were not enough people taking new mortgages to sustain the demand. As a result, the retail banks kept lowering lending standards. In some cases, retail banks would ask borrowers how much income they make at their job but not actually verify it, allowing anyone willing to lie to get a mortgage. Historically retail banks would never do these kinds of mortgages becuase the risk to them is too great, but in this case, the mortgage is being sold off. Once the actual risk taker, the investor, receives their shares, it has gone through a chain of investment banks that obfuscates the fact that these mortgages are much riskier than mortgages created one or two years before. Instead of doing deep research on all the products they are buying, investors rely on rating agencies to do that work for them.

In my estimation, the rating agencies were not stupid or even malicious. They knew lending standards were decreasing and they knew this increased the risk of mortgage-backed investments. What they had no way of knowing is whether this meant default rates would go from, say, 2% to 4%, or from 2% to 40%. They did not know because banks had never provided such mortgages before and they did not have historic data to model off of. As defaults do not happen immediately, the rating agencies waited nervously to see if their forecasts were accurate or not. 

The rest of the market was also waiting to see whether the continual increase in housing prices would become permanent, or if it was a "bubble" that would pop. Eventually it was apparent that it was a bubble. Housing prices began to tumble, which left many mortgage borrower paying down more than the house was worth, leading them to default on the mortgage. Some borrowers had also taken adjustable rate mortgages that were affordable for a year or two, but then became unaffordable once the initial "teaser rate" expired. The decline in housing prices and the increase in mortgage rates led to an unprecedented number of defaults and foreclosures. Rating agencies realized default rates were going to be more like 40%, the worst case estimates that they did not adopt when they rated these securities. Agencies started to downgrade their ratings. It is estimated for one of the "big 3" rating agencies, over 80% of securities created and given AAA in 2006 were eventually downgraded, and over 70% were downgraded all the way from AAA to "junk."

Institutions under government regulation were forced to sell the downgraded securities as they were no longer AAA, as did other investors. The mass sell-off the securities lowered the value of these securities substantially. Investment banks that were in the process of selling newly created securities found there was no market for them, and the shares they had trouble selling were now completely worthless. When auditors looked at the financial position of these banks, they were forced to price these assets at zero or near zero, despite the banks insisting that they could be worth money if the housing market recovered (it never did). For some banks, the value of these assets was the difference between solvency and insolvency, and they failed. While many banks were in the US, the crisis was in no way contained to the US. Banks in England and Europe also failed or were forced into purchase. 

In the US, many smaller retail banks were allowed to fail. Large investment banks and other mortgage institutions were also initially allowed to fail (e.g., Ameriquest, New Century, Lehman Brothers) before the government got spooked that too many failures might be catastrophic. They pivoted and became more proactive in trying to avoid failures, either brokering deals (e.g., Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch), providing funds (e.g., Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley), or offering to buy "troubled" securities off of banks at above-market prices. These kind of bailouts were not well-received by the general public, who felt banks should pay a price for creating these assets. The optics of a large investment banks taking government money and then paying out million dollar bonuses to their executives at year end did little to help the banks' case. 

The fast decline in the value of certain securities, questions about the accuracy of rating agencies, and the threat of large bank failures made investors feel less easy about loaning out any excess cash they had. It became harder for businesses to get short-term loans to fund new projects. The markets that provide these loans, and insurance for the loans, were historically seen as very safe (e.g., lending to a large company like Ford Motors was thought to be similar to lending the US government), but failures like Lehman Brothers (which ended up paying back \$0.08 on every \$1.00 it borrowed) and general pessimism caused these markets to seize up. This is one path by which a crisis that started in the housing market spread into the broader economy. It made business expansion plans difficult for any kind of business that does not have cash on hand, lowering employment rates, and leading to a general recession.  
